So welcome to the last session
in this room for the day.
This session is going to be on
Core Audio and how we deal with
surround and multi-channel in general.
My name's William Stewart and
I manage the Core Audio group,
but I'm not going to be really
talking in this session.
I just thought I'd introduce
the topics and then bring the
first presenter up on stage.
So there's a few different ways that
surround sort of goes through Core Audio.
We have general services for dealing
with surround and that will be covering
that in the sort of audio toolbox
multi-channel section of this talk.
The and there's sort of like just
general concepts of what surround
is and and how we publish its
capabilities and so forth in the system.
We'll begin the talk with
an overview of OpenAL 1.1.
OpenAL is an API for dealing
with games and audio.
And 1.1 is a recently released
spec that we're now supporting
with 1047 and in Leopard 2.
So the 1.1 overview is just to go through
some of the custom extensions that
we've made because our implementation
of OpenAL is based on Core Audio.
So that's why it's here.
We also have an
application called AU Lab,
and AU Lab is provided to support
audio unit development and usage.
And in particular,
AU Lab has a new version in Leopard
that supports multi-channel and
surround both audio units and
document configurations and so forth.
We're also going to be going
through panner audio units.
These are audio units that are
specifically focused around the
task of panning audio spatially,
and we're going to be going
through that in some detail.
And then on a completely unrelated topic,
just because we had
nowhere else to put it,
we're also adding MIDI output
capability to audio units in Leopard.
So we're going to finish
this talk with that.
So without any more to do,
I'll get Bob Aaron to come
up and talk about OpenAL.
Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
So what's new for OpenAL?
Well, since we shipped in Tiger,
the OpenAL community finished
up the 1.1 specification.
And basically there were three things
that got accomplished with this spec.
It was an opportunity to clean
up some of the existing APIs,
better document them so they might
be more consistently implemented.
It was an opportunity to
add some new features.
And also,
it was a chance to take some of the
existing extensions that were common
in several implementations that a
lot of developers were using and
roll those actually into the API,
the Core API set.
So as Bill mentioned,
what's new for Apple is that we
shipped our 1.1 spec implementation
with our latest software update,
10.4.7.
And that's a full 1.1 spec.
We added some new extensions.
We're now using the same
OpenAL headers that all the
other implementations are using.
There's no custom things in there.
And we added the cone support,
which is actually part of the 1.0 spec,
but we didn't implement
the first time around.
And those sources are available, again,
at the Creative Repository,
so you can go get those and build
them yourself if you want to.
So let's run through
some of the 1.1 features.
As I mentioned,
there's a chance for some clean-up.
So here's a list of a few things
that got done in this clean-up.
Some better error code
conditions were defined.
The closed device API was changed
to return a Boolean so you know
if it was a successful call.
One to note is the AOVersion attribute.
Now this was not implemented consistently
across the various implementations.
Some were returning a spec version,
some were returning an
implementation version.
This is documented now to be
the specification version.
Some pitch shift limits and a
couple of new types were defined.
So if you're familiar
with OpenAL or OpenGL,
you know there's a nomenclature for
getting or setting properties on
the various objects of the library.
In the 1.0 spec,
there were get and set source and
listener properties for the float type,
but not for integer,
so those were added here.
And then integer and float variants
were added for the buffer object.
Those didn't exist in 1.0.
In the 1.0 spec,
there's a notion of a Doppler mechanism.
It's not true Doppler where you've got
a pitch shift based on some movement of
your objects over some amount of time.
But it's a pitch shift that
allows your application to get
kind of this Doppler effect.
Now the Doppler velocity,
the AL Doppler velocity that's up there,
that was the 1.0 call and it was
very inconsistently implemented.
And the behavior across
implementations was to the point
where it wasn't very predictable,
so it wasn't really that useful.
That's been deprecated in the
1.1 spec and replaced with
the AL Speed of Sound API.
And there's the formula there.
It's still similar in that you
get pitch shift based on the
direction and velocities of your
source and your listener objects.
Okay, one of the big new features for 1.1
are the addition of some capture APIs.
Now, these are set up so your
application can grab data,
audio data, from the user's default
input device on their system.
You can grab that audio data and
then pass it to a buffer object
that can go and attach to a
source and play it back as output.
So as you'll see here,
the first two APIs are for
opening and closing your device,
similar to opening or closing
the output device in OpenAL.
The main difference with the open call
in the capture device call is that
you also indicate the format of the
data that you want to receive when
you grab the bytes from the library,
and also the size of the ring
buffer that you want OpenAL to
set up to write data into.
Once you have that device,
there are some calls for
starting and stopping the device.
There's really no need to be writing
into that ring buffer if you aren't
going to be grabbing the data,
so you don't want to be
using that processing time.
There's an API for capturing the samples,
so you can fill a buffer
with that audio data.
And then also you can use the
AOC Get Integer API with the AOC Capture
Samples property to discover how many
samples are available for you to grab.
So I'll just walk through a real simple
scenario of how you'd use these APIs.
As I mentioned, the first thing you'll
do is open a device.
And so if I walk through
those parameters,
we pass null at the beginning
because the Apple implementation
is always going to use the default
input device on your user system.
Now your user can set that in the
system prefs or the audio MIDI setup.
And so it always uses that,
so you don't have to
designate a device by name.
Now we're also telling the capture
device that we want data that's at
a sample rate of 44,100 and that
we want mono 16-bit integer data.
Now that last guy there, the 1,024,
that's how many samples we
want the ring buffer to be.
And keep in mind that's
a number in samples,
not in bytes.
So if that comes back successful,
then we want to start capturing,
have the device,
we want to have the library
start writing data from the
device into our ring buffer.
So it kind of goes merrily along,
chugging and filling up the ring buffer.
And at some point you'll want to
discover how many samples are available.
So we'll use the ALC get integer
call and the ALC capture samples,
find out how many samples
are there for us to grab.
And then once we have that value,
then we know how many we can request.
So we'll use the ALC capture samples.
Again, we pass it our device.
We give it a buffer that's
appropriately sized for the amount
of samples that we're requesting.
And we tell it how many samples we want.
And then the bytes are
written into that buffer.
So it's a pretty simple mechanism.
mechanism.
So the next thing we have that's new
for 1.1 are some new distance models.
Now the 1.0 specification had
one distance model that you could
pass to the AL distance model API,
and that was an inverse distance model.
And with 1.1, there have been two new
curves that were added.
First an exponential curve.
Now it's quite similar
to the inverse curve.
Really the main difference in
the effect of attenuation with
distance with this curve is that
as your roll-off factor increases,
your attenuation occurs more
quickly as your source moves
away from your listener object.
In addition to the exponential model,
there's also a linear distance model.
Now that's just a straight
attenuation line from no attenuation
at the reference distance to full
attenuation at the max distance.
So here we've got a graph
of the three curves.
And the reason I wanted to show
you this is so you could see the
similarities between the inverse and the
exponential model and the linear model.
So what you'll see about the inverse
and the exponential model is that when
they reach that maximum distance there,
that line on the right,
the vertical line on the right,
you'll notice that the curve stops
at that point and it flatlines.
Well,
basically what that means is that any
distance past that maximum distance,
that line on the left,
that maximum distance that your source
is in relation to the listener object,
there won't be any further attenuation.
It'll stop at that distance.
By contrast,
if you look at the linear model,
it's just a straight line to that
maximum distance and once you get there,
you're fully attenuated.
Another feature of 1.1 are some offset
abilities for your application to set
the playhead or get the playhead of
your open source object's buffer queue.
So you can do this while it's
rendering or while it's not rendering,
and you can get or set values in terms
of milliseconds or bytes or samples.
So for instance, here we've got a really
simple buffer queue.
It's just got two buffers,
a short one that's one second,
that happens to be 44,000 samples,
and a second one that's two
seconds and 88,000 samples.
And so your application may,
the source may be chugging along playing,
and the playhead may be where
that red arrow there indicates.
And we could discover that value
by using the AO Get Source I APIs,
and then the appropriate version,
whether we want the source or not.
So we can use the samples or the
millisecond offset to get that value.
Now we may want to jump, let's say,
to two and a half seconds in the buffer.
So we'll use the AL Source I APIs and
then give it a value that's appropriate,
and then it'll jump there.
So that'll occur whether
you're rendering or not.
So that's really sort of the
main new features of 1.1.
So let me show you, let me have a demo,
have the demo machine up,
and I'll show you some
of these in action.
[Transcript missing]
Oh, hey, here we go.
Okay, I switched,
but I don't see anything.
Oh, there we go.
There we go.
Yep, got it.
Thanks.
In the Core Audio SDK,
you actually can find a
project called OpenAL Example.
Sorry about that.
This is just a simple OpenAL application
that creates a context and
adds some source objects.
All these objects have buffers attached.
All these red guys and
yellow guys are sources.
We can move them around.
We've got surround in the room so you
should be able to hear these things.
We can move our listener around.
We can orient our listener.
Right, so we've got our context.
It's a top-down view,
so we're looking at X and Y here, not Z.
I mean, not X and Z, not Y, sorry.
So I'm going to turn a couple of
these off so we can demonstrate
a couple of these features.
So here we've got a
source and he's playing.
As I mentioned, we have cone support now
in this implementation.
So here we've got some cones.
The way the cones work in OpenAL is
there's a notion of an inner cone,
an outer cone, and an outer cone gain.
So here we've got our inner cone.
We can change the angle of that cone.
And the outer cone,
we can change the angle of that guy.
and then we have an outer cone gain
and I'll talk about that more as we go.
So the way that the API works is
as your listener moves around,
as long as he's within,
the listener is within the
inner cone of that source,
there's no attenuation occurring at all.
So I can move this here and as I move it,
I'll shut up in a second here.
As I move it, you can hear there's no
change of attenuation.
Alright,
so now as the listener moves outside
of that inner cone gain and toward
the outside of the outer cone gain,
we start getting some attenuation.
Now the volume of the source that
will be heard by the listener once
you're outside of that outer cone
gain is based completely on whatever
the outer cone gain setting is.
So if I change that and
raise that outer cone gain,
you'll hear that we have some gain.
So those are cone supports.
As you can see,
it doesn't matter whether your listener
is moving around your source object.
Your source is moving
around your listener.
Your source is in a different direction.
Alright, so that's cone support.
www.bobaron.com/audio/audio/
So why don't I turn a different sound
on here that's kind of good for this.
So we've got a car sound.
As you can see, as you can hear,
as I move it around the listener,
there's no pitch change.
So if we apply some velocity
or some speed of sound
setting to our source object,
It'll be indicated by... Oh, wrong guy.
Sorry.
You can see the direction based on that
little nose that's coming out of there.
You can hear that there's a pitch effect.
And this is going to change as we
change the direction of that velocity...
of that source speed of sound.
The pitch is completely based on
the direction of the listener and
the source objects and the vectors.
As the vectors change with
the movement of the objects,
you will get changes in pitch.
But they are not based over some
time distance over some time
period like real Doppler would be.
Alright, so that's Doppler.
Okay, let's turn that guy down.
Another feature that I mentioned about
1.1 were some new distance models.
Let's turn on this guy here.
Alright, so what we've been listening
so far are all these objects
that have been attenuating using
the default distance model,
which is an inverse model.
So you'll hear as I move the
source away from the listener,
you'll hear some attenuation by distance.
We should be hearing front to back.
[Transcript missing]
So our roll-off is a lot...
Our attenuation occurs much
quicker with that formula.
So that's exponential,
and then we have our linear guy here.
Before I do that, let me change the max
distance of our object.
We'll change it to 250,
and we'll switch to a linear model.
As you can see now that we get
to 250 away from our listener,
we're fully attenuated.
Alright, so that's the distance models.
And one of the big new features,
as I mentioned, was capture.
So I've got this cool little snowball
USB microphone here and it's the
device that's being used for capture.
And the way this application works
is as soon as it launches it opens
the capture device and it starts
capturing and this whole time it's
been writing whatever this guy's
been capturing into the ring buffer.
So I can now,
I'll go ahead and click on this button
and it'll capture what I've been
saying here as I've been talking.
It has then copied that data directly
into one of the buffer objects and
then attached to a source so we can now
play it and move it around our context.
Click on this button and it will
capture what I've been saying here.
Okay, so that's capture.
So if we could go back to slides.
So those are some of the
features as they're working.
Okay, so OpenAL extensions.
The way that extensions work in
OpenAL is it's a mechanism for
extending the API and discovering
whether an extension is there
while your application is running.
So it's got basically
three parts that you do.
First,
you query for an extension by name.
If it's available,
then you can go and get proc
pointers or constant values,
again, by name using the get proc address
or the get enum value APIs.
Now some of the new features I mentioned
in 1.1 were some of those features
that had existed as extensions
in various 1.0 implementations.
Now they weren't on the Apple one,
but they were on some various other ones,
and they were valuable for
the developer community,
and that's why they got
rolled into the 1.1 spec.
So the capture, the distance models,
the offset, those were all extensions
in a previous life,
a 1.0 spec life.
In the 1.1 implementation
that we've just delivered,
we can also get access to those
features through that mechanism.
So if you have a 1.0 application,
OpenAL application that was using these
features through the extension mechanism,
you can also do that with
this latest implementation,
as well as get at those through
the new APIs that have been added.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so the next thing we
have are some Mac OS X,
a Mac OS X extension,
and this is really just to expose some
of the specific Core Audio underpinnings
of the implementation.
So we can deal with
the mixer sample rate,
forced stereo rendering,
rendering quality, mixer bus,
and let me walk through
these one at a time.
So getting or setting the mixer
output rate is important for you,
or may be important for you,
depending on the sample rate
of the sources that you're
playing in your application,
and what hardware,
what sample rate that the hardware
is running on your user system.
So it's a little easier to explain
if I show you this little diagram.
So this is basically the Core Audio stack
in the implementation of OpenAL.
When your device is open
and your context is made,
basically what happens is you'll
look at the bottom box there,
it's the HAL device,
that's your user's hardware.
Now it's going to be running
at some particular sample rate,
and that sample rate gets propagated
down through the audio units that
are used for rendering in OpenAL.
So the thing that connects to that
device is a default output unit.
Now that 48K in this example
gets propagated down,
and the 3D mixer then is connected
to the default output unit.
So by default, what happens is all of
those red boxes there,
those represent OpenAL sources that,
for instance,
might be playing 22 kilohertz data.
What's going to happen is every one of
those gets sample rate converted to 48K,
and then those are mixed together
to whatever stream format we're
rendering out to the hardware,
and then that gets passed down the chain.
Well,
that's a little inefficient if you know
that you're going to be rendering sources
that are that particular sample rate.
So you can use this API then,
in this example, or others,
to set the mixer output rate to 22K.
Then what happens is all of those sources
get mixed at their native samples.
So you can see that the sample rate
is the same as the sample rate,
and then when that 22K data is
passed to the default output unit,
the sample rate conversion gets done
there on two or four or five streams,
whatever you happen to be
rendering to the hardware.
So this just gives you a little
bit of control to be smart and
efficient and make your application
just run that much better.
The next thing we have
is the rendering quality,
set and get rendering quality.
And the reason we added this is
the 3D mixer audio unit that does
really the bulk of the work in
this implementation has a notion
of various rendering qualities,
so you can make a trade-off
between CPU usage and quality.
If your user is running a system
that has four or five speakers,
basically this is a no-op.
You're always going to be using the
low or the normal rendering quality.
But if your user is using
headphones or a stereo system,
you have the ability to give them
a high quality HRTF rendering mode.
And of course this is a trade-off again.
The HRTF is more expensive,
but it may be worth it for your
user if they're on a system that
can handle those extra cycles.
All right, the next thing we have is
a render channel count.
The reason you might want to do this
is the Apple implementation of OpenAO,
what it does is it goes and
discovers how many channels are
on your user's hardware when the
context and the device are set up.
So if your user has a system
that has 5 or more channels,
OpenAO is going to render to 5.0.
If your user has 4 channels
connected to their hardware,
if their hardware is running 4 channels,
OpenAO is going to render to quad,
and then by default it runs to stereo.
Well, you might have a circumstance where
your user has maybe a 5.0 system,
but they want to plug some headphones in,
and in that case you wouldn't
want the library to be rendering
to 5.0 if your user wasn't going
to get all of those channels.
So you can force the rendering to
stereo regardless of your user's
hardware by using these two functions.
Lastly, the maximum mixer buses.
By default, the OpenAL 3D Mixer
Audio Unit has 64 input buses,
and that's sort of the limitation
that gets passed into OpenAL for
the amount of simultaneous sources
that you can have rendering.
Now, this is a settable property.
The 3D Mixer can have more buses than 64.
That just happens to be the default.
So if you need to render to
more than 64 sources at a time,
you can then go ahead
and make that setting.
Now, whenever you make it,
you also should then also get the maximum
mixer buses to confirm that the setting
that you wanted was actually possible and
see how many mixer buses were available.
Lastly,
we'll talk about the ASA extension.
This is kind of the big new thing
for us by adding reverb and occlusion
and obstruction effects to OpenAL.
This will be available whenever your
application is running on a system that
has the 2.2 3D mixer audio unit present.
And that also shipped with 1047 along
with our 1.1 implementation of OpenAL.
So right out of the box
you should get that.
The extension is pretty simple.
It's basically four APIs and
a bunch of constants.
I'll talk about the constants in a bit,
the properties.
There's a get and a set listener
property call and a get and
a set source property call.
They all take a property,
which is an integer, some data,
data size,
and of course the source variance
of those APIs also take a source ID,
an OpenAL source ID.
So let's talk a little bit
about the source properties.
First, we have a reverb send level.
That's a per source property.
It's a wet/dry mix level where zero,
the default value of zero,
means that there's no reverb
being applied to your source.
And a value of 1.0 means all you're
hearing is the reverb return,
no actual direct source signal.
Next we have occlusion.
Occlusion is a low-pass filter
that gets applied to the source's
direct signal to the listener.
So you can emulate your source
being in a different physical
space by using this property.
It's a setting in dB.
It takes a float from 0 to -100.
And for occlusion,
the low-pass filter is also applied to
the signal that's sent out to the reverb.
So both reverb send, reverb return,
and direct signal get filtered.
Okay, now the last source property
is the ASA obstruction.
This is also a low-pass filter.
It gets applied to the
direct signal of your source.
Again, it's a float value that's
in dB from 0 to -100.
And the difference here is that the
signal that's sent out to the reverb
does not get the low-pass filter applied.
So all of the sparkly transients
of your reverbs will still be
heard even though you're applying
obstruction to your source object.
So we have some listener properties.
They're pretty standard,
what you would expect.
We have to be able to turn our
reverb on and set a global level.
And then, just like we have the rendering
quality in the 3D mixer,
we have the ability to
set a reverb quality,
so you can make a trade-off
between the quality of that
reverb and how much CPU is needed.
So there's a reverb quality.
The reverb also has some
EQ settings so that you can apply
some EQ to the reverb signal.
It's basically a parametric EQ,
so if you're familiar with parametric EQ,
you know that there's a gain,
which is a cutter boost, a bandwidth,
and a frequency for the
center of that bandwidth.
These properties are
settable in real time.
They're also storable in AU preset files,
and I'll talk a little bit more
about that in just a second.
So there's a couple of ways
that you can get a particular
reverb sound into OpenAL.
First is using the reverb room type.
We've defined a bunch of constants
that you can pass as values for there.
A lot of what you might expect,
various small, large rooms, chambers,
cathedral,
they're pretty self-explanatory.
And those are just constant
values that you can pass in.
But more interestingly is the ability for
you to load AU preset files at runtime.
And so those AU preset files are
things that you can save by running
some signal through the matrix
reverb and saving that as a preset
and then loading it at runtime.
And I'll show you how to
do that in just a second.
So just a little bit of a code
snippet here about how the
extension mechanism gets used,
for example, with the ASA extension.
So you see that one line
of code that's in yellow.
We're querying to see if the extension
that we want is present at runtime.
So we're going to call it by name.
We're going to ask for it by name.
If that happens to come back true,
we're on a system that has it,
then we go and, for instance,
go get the proc pointer for
the ASA set listener call.
Now, once this is done,
now you can use this
function to access that API.
So here's a couple of really
simple boxes on how you can then
set up one of your reverb types.
So we've got one here where we're
using the reverb room type property.
We're passing in the reverb
room type cathedral constant,
and just by making this call then,
that's the reverb that'll
get used by OpenAL.
By contrast, the box below,
that little tiny function there,
that's a path to your AU preset
file that gets passed on to the
set listener proc call using
the ASA reverb preset property.
So with that,
if we could go back to the demo machine,
I'll give you a little demo on how
you could go ahead and make those
custom reverbs just with things
that are already on your system.
So what I've got here is a document.
This is an AU Lab document,
and Michael's going to talk a
little bit more about AU in a bit.
But this is a document that
has a sound file attached,
and in this channel strip here,
we also have a Matrix Reverb
Audio Unit installed.
So we've got a reverb here,
so let me play this sound.
Alright, so there's our dry signal.
Here's our reverb.
Now we can go ahead and make
some reverb settings here.
I'll just try and do something
drastic here so you can hear it.
There we go, that's pretty drastic.
Now if you notice these last three
parameters at the bottom here,
the filter frequency, filter bandwidth,
and filter gain,
these equate to those EQ properties that
you can set on your listener reverb EQ.
So these can be saved
along with a preset.
and I will boost it,
do something drastic there.
Now we can save this preset out.
We're going to save this preset.
We've saved the preset.
I don't need to save the document.
Now we have a preset file on our system.
Now you can use that preset
file to load at runtime.
So if I launch my OpenAL example
application again,
Maybe you spotted this guy
before I covered it up.
So here's the ASA extension parameters
that are exposed in the API.
So let me get just one again so
that we can kind of hear the reverb.
So what we have right now
is no reverb being applied.
So let's turn on our reverb.
Set the quality to max, that's fine.
And let's set it to the cathedral.
Okay,
so you don't hear anything yet because
we haven't actually changed the dry/wet
mix of that particular source object.
So now here we have OpenAL source
object sending to a reverb.
Let me bring that back and
I'll show you occlusion.
[Transcript missing]
So as you notice,
with occlusion and obstruction,
both are being, a low pass filter is
being applied to both.
But there's no reverb
playing so you don't hear a
difference in how these behave.
So let me change to a reverb
preset that I had made earlier.
This is my airport terminal preset.
Alright,
so now I'll apply some occlusion.
As you can hear,
both the direct sound and the
reverb return is being filtered.
But as I apply obstruction,
if you listen carefully,
it may be a little difficult in the hall.
If you listen carefully,
the direct signal is
going to be filtered,
but the reverb trails
will remain the same.
So really obstruction is used to
emulate something that's really between
your listener and your source object,
but in the still the same physical space.
All that reverb characteristics
will stay the same.
Just a couple other
little things to show you.
As I change my custom presets,
you'll notice that the
EQ settings will change.
Again, because those are stored along
with the AU preset files.
So that pretty much sums
up OpenAL for Mac OS X.
I'm going to pass it over
to Michael Hopkins now,
and he's going to talk about AULAB,
which you just saw,
in a little bit more detail.
Thank you, Bob.
Could I go back to slides, please?
Before I jump right into
new features in AU Lab,
I thought I'd start by providing
a bit of context by talking about
audio units and a little bit
about host applications as well.
Audio Units are the plug-in
specification for audio on Mac OS X.
The Audio Unit is packaged
as a component bundle,
and a host application uses the
component manager to locate a
specific Audio Unit and then open it.
A component bundle can also
contain more than one Audio Unit.
The host application,
when it loads the Audio Unit,
can then present a custom user interface,
whether it be Carbon or Cocoa.
[Transcript missing]
Offline units which perform
processing that can't be accomplished
in real time such as reversing
the contents of an audio stream.
And finally the Panner Unit which
is new to Leopard which James will
be talking about in great detail
later on in the presentation.
There are many different host
applications on Mac OS X,
and this list is by no means complete.
And these target a number of different
users such as the professional user,
a DJ performing live in a hall,
the consumer hobbyist,
or even the developer,
where applications such as AU Lab,
which we'll talk about in a minute,
are used for testing purposes
by many third-party vendors.
Let me talk about this
application now in more detail.
As we mentioned,
it's part of your development
tools installation on Tiger,
and now there's a new version
that comes with your Leopard Seed.
It supports mono, stereo,
and now multi-channel audio units,
and is capable of displaying the
Carbon and Cocoa user interfaces,
or also providing a generic view
if that custom view is not present.
New features in the AU Lab 2.0
version on your Leopard Seed
include a patch manager,
which allows you to group a number
of different tracks together and
quickly switch between these groups.
A studio view that allows you to see an
overview of your MIDI setup and the audio
input and outputs for your document.
A visibility feature that allows
you to toggle the visibility of
different tracks based on their type.
And our marquee feature for AU Lab,
which is improved audio unit support,
including multi-channel support and
support for the new pattern unit type.
Now I'd like to focus a
bit on patch management.
As I mentioned,
this feature allows you to
create groups of tracks,
which I'll subsequently
refer to as patches.
And these patches are saved
directly in the document file.
You have created for you by default
a default patch which contains
all the tracks in the document.
And you can switch between
these tracks simply by clicking.
Any track that is not part of
the active patch does not consume
CPU resources since it's not active.
Let me look at an example here.
As you can see,
we have a rather complex document open,
and the patch manager appears on
the right-hand side as a drawer
attached to the document window.
You can imagine that this scenario would
be useful for somebody performing in a
live performance situation where they
have a number of different tracks that
are all connected to the same instrument,
and they want to quickly
switch between them.
It's also useful for a developer who
has several different tracks that each
is containing the same audio unit,
but with a different preset.
The developer could then quickly
switch between them using
the patch manager feature.
So let's look at this in more detail.
As you can see in the upper
right-hand corner there,
the default patch is listed in bold,
meaning that it's the active patch,
and therefore you see all
the tracks in the document.
There are three additional
patches defined,
the first one being drum and bass,
and you'll see a number of bullets
to the right of each track name,
and these indicate whether that specific
track is part of that active patch.
The first item being
in gray is not active,
whereas the bass track is,
and therefore appears in orange.
So if I switch between the
default patch and our first patch,
the drum and bass patch,
you'll see that now we have a different
number of tracks that are active.
Switching again changes
those tracks again based on
whether they're in that patch.
So it's a really nice
new feature in AU Lab.
Continuing on, we have a studio view,
which is also in that drawer,
and that is comprised of two components:
a MIDI view and an audio view.
The MIDI section shows an overview
of all the sources that each
instrument or music effect is using,
and it's listed in a
hierarchical fashion,
allowing you to easily switch
the source simply by dragging
and dropping those items.
The Audio View provides a
summary and editing of the audio
settings such as the device,
and also shows you the channel
assignments that each one of those
input and output tracks are using.
We'll see this in my demo in a bit.
And now our key feature which is
multi-channel audio unit support
which we define in AU Lab as being
comprised of more than two channels.
Each channel of audio goes to a specific
speaker and the speakers can be arranged
in many different configurations.
We've chosen three basic types to
represent in AU Lab based on their
popularity and how prevalent they are.
The first one,
the surround configuration,
is typically used by home theater
or cinema applications where you
have five or more satellite speakers
arranged in a circle around the
listener which is represented by
the white couch here in the diagram.
The listener would be facing
the center speaker which is
located above the screen.
In this application,
we also can have an LFE channel where
all the low frequency effects are sent.
An additional layout that we have in
AU Lab is the geometric layout featuring
the ever popular quadraphonic layout
for those of you that remember that.
And this type of layout allows a
regularly spaced geometry which in
the diagram here you'll see is a
hexagonal or six channel layout,
each of which is separated
by an angle of 60 degrees.
And this type of layout is sometimes used
in concert environments or concert halls.
Our final configuration is
a constrained configuration,
which you can imagine at a
stadium where you're seeing
Madonna or something like that.
And it allows you to have three
or more speakers arranged in an
arc in front of the listener,
where each speaker is equidistant.
And the first and last speaker
define a specific spanning angle,
which in this case is 60 degrees.
In AU Lab now, every track,
instead of being able to
support mono or stereo,
can now have up to eight
channels of output.
We do this by defining
an audio channel layout,
and you can have one per document
regardless of how many multi-channel
outputs you have in your document.
And this audio channel layout,
which James will be talking
about in more detail later,
defines both the channel ordering
and the speaker positions.
Additionally,
now we have support for the new audio,
excuse me, the panner unit,
or you can also choose to use the
built-in surround panner in AU Lab.
Now I'd like to switch the demo station,
where we'll look at this in more detail.
Demo, please?
Thank you.
So I'm going to go ahead
and launch AULAB here.
And once AULAB comes up,
you'll see that we're presented with
a document configuration assistant
that allows us to specify the input
and output channels of the document,
starting here with a
stereo default output.
I can choose to add or remove
channels here or change the
configuration of each output track.
And you'll notice that the view
always shows the total number of
channels that the outputs will have.
For the purposes of this demo,
I'm going to go ahead and add a
single multichannel output track.
And the dialog expands to allow us to
choose the configuration of that track.
And you'll also notice that we
have a diagram indicating the
position of those speakers.
We can determine whether
we want to include a center
channel or an LFE channel,
for example.
And you'll notice that
as we choose those,
the view updates to show you how many
total channels your output will be using.
And these allow me to choose the
formats that I mentioned earlier,
the constrained format,
geometric layouts,
as well as the surround layouts.
And I'm going to go ahead for
the purposes of this example
and use a 5.1 surround layout
where I'm using five channels,
no LFE channel.
I click next and now configure the
input by adding a single stereo input.
And now I'm ready to configure the device
that we'll be using for our document.
I'm going to switch from built-in
to our Firewire device which
supports more than stereo.
And you'll notice now that
I have a five channel output,
but I need to specify the
channel ordering for that
since this is not correct.
In this hall I have left
assigned to channel one,
right assigned to channel two,
center assigned to three,
and I have a gap between five
and six where the LFE is here.
I'm going to go ahead and click
done to create that document.
And what's important to notice is that
this document works exactly the same
way as the previous version of AU Lab.
We've just extended all the features
to provide support for multi-channel.
So for example,
you'll see five channels here in
the meters instead of just two.
And if I open the new studio view,
you'll notice now that we have
a graphical representation of
where our inputs are on the
device as well as our outputs.
And we're free to edit that if we want,
but that's beyond the scope
of what I'd like to show here.
Adding an insert is simply selecting
that from the insert pop-up menu.
So I can add a stereo delay,
and then if I want I can choose
to add a stereo to five channel
effect such as a matrix reverb,
etc.
Again this works exactly
the same way that it did
previously with mono and stereo.
Not only do we support
multi-channel effects,
we also support multi-channel
instruments and generators.
So for example,
if I add an audio file player,
I can show the additional
details and specify that
that's a five-channel player.
For the purposes of this example,
I'd like to just do a mono one so I can
demonstrate the panner a bit easier.
So I'm going to create that generator.
[Transcript missing]
And as you can see by the meters here,
most of the sound is going towards
the center channels because
that's where my panner is aligned.
So as I rotate that, you'll notice by the
meters that's more left,
more right.
I also have the capacity of specifying
the distance from the listener
to the source where the listener
is in the center of the knob.
Closer, farther away.
Okay, I'll now turn this up so
you can hear the effect.
It's also important to
note that if I so choose,
I can bypass this default surround
panner and use one of the panner units
just by adding that into the track.
But James will be talking
about that in more detail.
In fact, I'd like to now turn over the
rest of the session to James,
who will be speaking about
multichannel and other topics.
Could I go back to demo, please?
Slides.
Excuse me, slides.
Okay, my name is James McCartney.
I'm going to talk about
doing--writing code for
multichannel audio and Core Audio.
You primarily do this
through the Audio Toolbox.
The main thing you need to know to
write code for multichannel audio
is what an audio channel layout is.
An audio channel layout is a
structure that's metadata on top of
an audio stream basic description.
Audio stream basic description
is the structure that we use to
describe audio throughout Core Audio.
So an audio channel layout is
composed of three main parts.
There's--